Superconductors A Song of Ice and Wire

The year is 2035. 
You hop out of bed onto your levitation board (you’ve always wanted one of these), and grab your phone from the bedside table. The thing has been lightning fast since they upgraded it to use a quantum computing processor.
You stumble over to your desk and place your hands on your laptop. It had been running simulations all night but still feels cool to the touch. Next to it, your power bill for the month is laid out. It’s costing you nearly half of what it used to since they installed those new superconducting power lines in your part of the city. Not bad.
You answer a phone call from your Mom. Thank goodness, the MRI scans haven’t shown anything serious from a recent flurry of headaches.
You eventually make it to the train station, where the mag-lev bullet train whizzes you to work. Today’s going to be very average, you think to yourself…
Does this sound like stuff out of a sci-fi novel to you? Amazingly it’s not - these are actually all real applications of superconductors, some of which are already being put to use today. Quantum computing, faster, more efficient computers that generate zero heat, power lines with no energy loss, MRI scanners, magnetic levitation trains – the future of technology sounds pretty cool, and it hinges on the use of superconductors.

Let’s rewind a little bit, what are these strange sounding devices and where did they come from?
In 1911, the great Dutch physicist Heike Kamerlingh Onnes made a rather surprising discovery. When he cooled down mercury (the element, not the planet) to near absolute zero temperature, he found that its electrical resistance suddenly and entirely disappeared. We’re talking thousands of times less resistance than the best conducting materials known at the time. This meant that a current could theoretically run through the material unimpeded for an infinite amount of time – think about a car that is able to race around a track forever, without even needing an engine.
Now Onnes would go on to win a Nobel Prize for this discovery two years later, but an important question lingered: what was the physical explanation for this sudden drop in resistance? It turns out that this was a very difficult question to answer. In fact, it took 46 years, and a couple more Nobel Prizes to come up with a satisfactory explanation.
The result? What is now known as BCS theory – a theory developed by physicists Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer that microscopically describes why superconductors exhibit the properties that they do.


Think about the coldest weather you’ve ever experienced. Maybe you made a trip to the arctic to see the Northern lights, or maybe you spent a couple of weeks visiting your aunt in wintery Winnipeg. Do you remember the temperature? Let’s assume it was something close to -40° C. Freezing I know, but that would actually be downright toasty compared to the temperatures that conventional superconductors operate at. The mercury that Onnes used had to be cooled down to 4.2 K or -267° C. Even Winnipegers wouldn’t want to live in that.
This super-cold requirement put a slight damper on commercial applications – it’s not exactly cheap or easy to operate equipment at such low temperatures. So is it possible for superconductors to work at more reasonable temperatures? Physicists weren’t sure because BCS theory, which was so good at explaining the physics behind superconductors, predicted an upper limit of 30 K or -243° C. 
Undeterred by mere theoretical limits, physicists attempted to search for superconductors that could operate at higher temperatures. And finally in 1986, two IBM researchers created a material that was superconducting at temperatures just above the theoretical limit. In typical superconductor fashion, these IBM researchers would go on to win a Nobel Prize for their work.
This discovery opened the floodgates for research into what we call high-temperature superconductors. Fast-forward to 2016 and we are edging closer and closer to room temperature, with the current record being held by a team of researchers at the Max Planck Institute in Germany, where they observed Hydrogen Sulfide to become superconducting at       -70° C (albeit at pressures 1.5 million times those at sea level).
Okay so that’s all pretty cool, but how do these things actually work?
Let’s first take a look at regular conductors, like the copper wire used to distribute electricity in your house. Metals such as copper can be thought of as being made up of a positively charged lattice, which you can envision as a 3D grid of tiny atomic nuclei, alongside an ocean of negatively charged electrons flowing through this lattice. Electrical resistance occurs when these electrons bump into the lattice and lose some of their energy (which is often lost in the form of heat – this is how an electric stove works).
Typically, we see a steady decline in electrical resistance as temperature decreases, since the electrons and lattice have less energy and are thus less likely to bump into each other. However, when a material enters the superconducting state, its electrical resistance immediately drops to zero. How is this possible?
This is where BCS theory comes in. Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer introduced the idea that two electrons at low enough temperatures can overcome their repulsive interaction and attract each other in what is known as Cooper pairing. These Cooper pairs behave as fundamentally different particles than electrons – while electrons act as what we call fermions, paired electrons act as bosons. The difference between these two types of particles is the key for what allows a material to become superconducting. 
No two fermions are allowed to be in the same state - if you picture a box, one fermion could be in the center of the box and one could be in the left corner, while bosons ARE allowed to occupy the same state – you can have as many bosons as you’d like all at the center of the box. 
What this means for BCS theory is that every Cooper pair is able to occupy the lowest energy state. And because quantum mechanics only allows the lattice to bump into the Cooper pairs if it has some minimum energy (particles cannot absorb an infinitely small amount of energy), low enough temperatures will allow Cooper pairs to flow without ever bumping into the lattice, thus giving us zero electrical resistance! 
Phew, I think that’s enough physics for today.
So if zero electrical resistance is so amazing and has so many useful applications, why aren’t we using them for all of our electrical needs?
 The number one reason is the low temperature requirement. While current applications such as MRI scanners and particle accelerators cool their wiring down past -267° C, in most cases it is simply too expensive and difficult from an engineering standpoint to maintain these low temperatures. This is why a room temperature superconductor is considered to be the holy grail of the field – if we can achieve superconductivity at room temperature, we can open the doors for countless useful applications.
While the field of high temperature superconductors has made significant progress in the last 50 years, there is still a long way to go. Our current understanding of superconductors which is grounded in BCS theory, has no good explanation for the mechanism of superconductivity above 30 K. However, if the history of superconductor discoveries has taught us anything, it is that when you let some of the smartest people in the world tackle incredibly difficult problems, amazing things can happen. 
